
PAGE 1
  
Delft University of Technology
Document Version
Final published version
Licence
CC BY
Citation (APA)
Diaz-Londono, C., Orfanoudakis, S., Vergara Barrios, P. P., Palensky, P., Ruiz, F., & Gruosso, G. (2026). Open source
algorithms for maximizing V2G flexibility based on model predictive control. Electric Power Systems Research, 250,
Article 112082. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2025.112082
Important note
To cite this publication, please use the final published version (if applicable).
Please check the document version above.
Copyright
In case the licence states “Dutch Copyright Act (Article 25fa)”, this publication was made available Green Open
Access via the TU Delft Institutional Repository pursuant to Dutch Copyright Act (Article 25fa, the Taverne
amendment). This provision does not affect copyright ownership.
Unless copyright is transferred by contract or statute, it remains with the copyright holder.
Sharing and reuse
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download, forward or distribute the text or part of it, without
the consent of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license such as
Creative Commons.
Takedown policy
Please contact us and provide details if you believe this document breaches copyrights.
We will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
This work is downloaded from Delft University of Technology.

PAGE 2
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Electric Power Systems Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/epsr  
Open source algorithms for maximizing V2G flexibility based on model 
predictive control
Cesar Diaz-Londono a,b
 , Stavros Orfanoudakis c
 ,∗, Pedro P. Vergara c, Peter Palensky c
 , 
Fredy Ruiz b
 , Giambattista Gruosso b
a Center for Research on Microgrids (CROM), Huanjiang Laboratory, Wenzhong Road No. 7, Zhuji, Shaoxing, Zhejiang, 311800, China
b Politecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Via G. Ponzio, Milan, 20133, Milano  (MI), Italy
c Delft University of Technology, Intelligent Electrical Power Grids, Mekelweg 5, Delft, 2628  CD, The Netherlands
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Electric vehicles (EVs)
Smart charging
Battery degradation
Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G)
Model predictive control (MPC)
 A B S T R A C T
Integrating electric vehicles (EVs) into the power grid can revolutionize energy management strategies, offering 
both challenges and opportunities for creating a more sustainable and resilient grid. In this context, model 
predictive control (MPC) emerges as a powerful tool for addressing the complexities of Grid-to-Vehicle (G2V) 
and Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) enabled demand response management. By leveraging advanced optimization 
techniques, MPC algorithms can anticipate future grid conditions and dynamically adjust EV charging and 
discharging schedules. However, no standard tools exist to evaluate novel energy management strategies based 
on MPC approaches. This work focuses on harnessing the potential of MPC in G2V and V2G applications by 
providing open-source algorithms that allow the maximization of EV flexibility and support demand response 
initiatives while mitigating the impact on EV battery health. Through extensive simulation and analysis, we 
demonstrate the efficacy of our approach in maximizing the benefits of G2V and V2G while assessing the impact 
on the longevity and reliability of EV batteries. Specifically, the proposed methods enable the optimization 
of EV charging and discharging schedules in real-time, taking into account fluctuating energy prices, grid 
constraints, and EV user preferences.
1. Introduction
As the adoption of electric vehicles (EVs) continues to surge, the 
efficient management of charging infrastructure becomes increasingly 
important [1]. Grid-to-vehicle (G2V) technology facilitates energy flow 
in a unidirectional manner, whereas vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technology 
enables bidirectional energy flow between EVs and the grid, thereby 
unlocking the potential for EV batteries to serve as flexible energy 
storage resources [2,3]. However, the effective implementation of G2V 
and V2G strategies faces numerous uncertainties, including fluctuat-
ing energy demands, variable renewable energy generation, inflexible 
loads, and dynamic EV schedules [4].
1.1. Literature review
Various strategies have been explored in the literature to address 
the EV smart charging problem, aiming to balance user requirements, 
grid stability, and energy cost optimization. Among them, rule-based 
approaches have been widely adopted due to their practical simplicity 
and effectiveness. One example is the strategy presented in [5], which 
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: s.orfanoudakis@tudelft.nl (S. Orfanoudakis).
incorporates V2G integration, allowing EVs to inject power back into 
the grid during peak-load or high-tariff periods. A similar rule-based 
framework is described in [6], where both charging and discharging 
processes are managed in the context of renewable energy systems 
to enhance grid flexibility. Literature review Table  1 provides a com-
prehensive comparison of key algorithmic approaches for smart EV 
charging, highlighting their capabilities in terms of real-time operation, 
V2G support, battery degradation modeling, open-source availability, 
and benchmarking against optimal solutions.
To address the increasing complexity of smart charging scenar-
ios, heuristic and metaheuristic methods have also been explored. A 
fuzzy logic-based control system for managing EV battery charging 
and discharging is proposed in [7], offering adaptive responses under 
varying grid conditions. In [8], an improved honey badger algorithm, 
combined with dynamic programming, is employed to optimize G2V 
and V2G power flows in a system that integrates EV parking lots. 
Additionally, the artificial bee colony optimization algorithm described 
in [9] addresses the multi-objective optimization challenges inherent 
in smart charging, drawing inspiration from the foraging behavior of 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2025.112082
Received 26 July 2024; Received in revised form 23 July 2025; Accepted 29 July 2025
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
Available online 20 August 2025 
0378-7796/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

PAGE 3
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Notation
Sets and Indices
𝐼 Set of EV chargers, indexed by 𝑖
𝐽 Set of EVs, indexed by 𝑗
𝐺 Set of transformers, indexed by 𝑔
𝐾 Set of time steps, indexed by 𝑘
𝐻 MPC prediction horizon, indexed by ℎ
𝛷𝑔 Chargers connected to transformer 𝑔
Parameters
𝛥𝑡 Time step duration
𝐸𝑗 Battery capacity of EV 𝑗
𝑎𝑗 , 𝑑𝑗 Arrival and departure time of EV 𝑗
𝑃
𝑐
𝑖 , 𝑃
𝑑
𝑖 Max charging/discharging power at charger 
𝑖
𝜂𝑐 , 𝜂𝑑 Charging/discharging efficiency
𝜋𝑐
𝑘, 𝜋𝑑
𝑘 Charge/discharge price at time 𝑘
𝜋𝑐
𝑘,𝐹 𝑙𝑒𝑥, 𝜋𝑑
𝑘,𝐹 𝑙𝑒𝑥 Flexibility prices at time 𝑘
𝑆 𝑜𝐶𝑗,𝑎𝑗 SoC at EV arrival
𝑆 𝑜𝐶𝑗,𝑑𝑗
, 𝑆 𝑜𝐶𝑗,𝑑𝑗 Min and max target SoC at EV departure
𝑆 𝑜𝐶𝑗,min Minimum SoC allowed while discharging
𝑥𝑖,𝑘, 𝑥𝑖,𝑘 Min and max battery capacity
𝛹𝑔 Transformer power limit
̃𝑙𝑔,𝑘, ̃𝑤𝑔,𝑘 Forecasted load/PV gen. at transformer 𝑔
𝑃 𝐷𝑅
𝑔,𝑘 Demand Response power at transformer 𝑔
Decision Variables
𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘, 𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 Ch. & disch. power at charger 𝑖 and time 𝑘
𝑧𝑖,𝑘 Binary: 1 for charging, 0 for discharging
𝑥𝑖,𝑘 Battery capacity of the EV at charger 𝑖 and 
time 𝑘
𝐹 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘, 𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 Offered charging/discharging flexibility
Other Variables
𝜉𝑖,𝑘 EV connection status at charger 𝑖 and time 
𝑘
𝑂𝐶𝑀
𝑘 Operating cost at time 𝑘
𝑂𝐹 𝑀
𝑘 Flexibility reward at time 𝑘
𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑡 Total battery capacity lost
𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑙 , 𝑑𝑐𝑦𝑐 Calendar/cyclic battery degradation
honeybees. Other metaheuristic techniques, such as particle swarm 
optimization and genetic algorithms, have also demonstrated promis-
ing results in reducing fluctuations during bidirectional charging, as 
discussed in [10].
Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods have further contributed to 
the development of intelligent and adaptive charging strategies [11,
12]. In particular, real-time energy management systems based on RL 
have shown the potential to achieve significant energy savings in EV in-
tegration scenarios [13]. Complementarily, consensus-based algorithms 
combined with blockchain principles have been proposed to coordinate 
EV charging with low computational complexity, as presented in [14].
Other approaches rely on mathematical programming techniques 
to address the smart charging problem from a formal optimization 
perspective. For instance, in [15], a real-time approach is introduced to 
manage EV charging schedules using satisfaction assignment and prior-
itized charging strategies, all while considering operational constraints. 
Additionally, in [16], a linear model is employed to maximize the 
utilization of photovoltaic (PV) power generation during EV charging 
peaks, while ensuring the EVs’ state of charge (SoC) constraints are met. 
Furthermore, Linear Programming (LP) techniques have been utilized 
to optimize load factor during daily operations of EV parking lots, 
considering uncertainties in EV behavior such as arrival and departure 
times [17]. Similarly, [18] proposes a mixed-integer programming 
model to maximize revenues for a V2G EV aggregator in the UK 
electricity market. In [19], the synchronization of forecast-based opti-
mization with management operation is implemented for EV charging 
and discharging patterns. Optimal dispatching methods can reduce 
the curtailment of wind turbines and PV power [20] or reduce the 
generation cost [21] in distribution systems. While these approaches 
provide linear models for both small and large-scale problems, they are 
limited due to the absence of real-time control to handle the inherent 
uncertainties.
Model Predictive Control (MPC) stands out as a powerful solu-
tion for navigating the intricacies of G2V and V2G-enabled demand 
response management [22]. In [23], a real-time MPC strategy was 
proposed, effectively reducing operational costs by treating EVs as 
flexible loads, thereby enabling adjustments in the power allocation 
and charging duration for each EV. Similarly, in [24], an MPC method 
was introduced to coordinate EVs on a large scale, enhancing grid 
robustness and cutting operational expenses. Moreover, [25] proposed 
a scenario-based MPC approach, combining robust and stochastic mod-
els to minimize the total operational cost for energy management. 
In [26], a real-time cost-minimization energy management strategy 
was introduced, aiming to maximize the economic potential of EVs 
while addressing battery degradation, thus mitigating a single vehicle’s 
operating costs. Beyond economic optimization, MPC has also been 
recognized for its ability to contribute to grid stability. For instance, 
advancements in MPC have shown effectiveness in mitigating frequency 
fluctuations and reducing harmonic distortions, making it a viable so-
lution for maintaining power system stability in renewable-dominated 
grids [27]. Additionally, MPC has demonstrated potential in delivering 
ancillary services such as frequency containment reserve, further sup-
porting its role in modern grid management [28]. Even though many 
MPC methods have been developed, there remains a gap in achieving 
a comprehensive real-time demand response solution while assessing 
battery degradation.
Furthermore, while there are many open-source simulation tools for 
fleet charging management, they often lack baseline MPC implementa-
tions. For instance, FleetRL [29] provides a customizable environment 
for commercial vehicle fleets, utilizing RL for charging optimization, as-
sessing factors like economic feasibility, battery health, and operational 
efficiency. While FleetRL offers a useful simulation framework, it lacks 
support for constraint-aware optimization and does not incorporate 
MPC-based coordination for flexibility or battery health. Similarly, 
Chargym [30] and SustainGym [31] offer simulation environments for 
EV charging, focusing on RL algorithm development but with simpli-
fied models. Other platforms also illustrate this limitation. OPEN [32] 
addresses broader smart energy systems but lacks MPC integration. The 
Open V2X Management Platform [33] emphasizes clustering EV users 
into behavioral profiles and forecasting daily energy demand at charg-
ing stations; it does not integrate any MPC-based control mechanism. 
Likewise, the tool introduced in [34] enables advanced V2G analysis 
within urban power and transportation networks. Still, coordination 
is based on participation willingness rather than optimal dispatch, 
limiting its applicability for optimization-based strategies. In [35], a 
real-time charging heuristic is proposed to maximize driver satisfac-
tion and ensure fair power allocation; however, it does not leverage 
predictive control methods such as MPC. Considering the demonstrated 
effectiveness of MPC in EV smart charging, the development of an open-
source MPC-based framework is critically important. Such a platform 
would enable standardized benchmarking, foster reproducible research, 
and facilitate the practical evaluation of MPC strategies under realistic 
operational constraints, ultimately bridging the gap between academic 
research and real-world deployment.
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
2 

PAGE 4
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Table 1
Literature review table for Smart EV Charging approaches.
 References Algorithm Approach Real-time V2G Battery 
degradation
Open-source Compared with 
optimal solution
 
 [6] PSO, GA, etc. Metaheuristic Yes Yes No No No  
 [7] Fuzzy logic Hybrid Yes Yes No No No  
 [8] Honey badger Metaheuristic No Yes No No No  
 [9] Bee colony Metaheuristic No No No No No  
 [10] PSO, GA Metaheuristic No Yes No No No  
 [11,12] Reinforcement learning Learning-based Yes Yes No Yes Yes  
 [14] Consensus-based blockchain Distributed Yes Yes No No No  
 [16,17] Linear optimization Mathematical Prog. No No No No Yes  
 [18,19] Mixed-integer LP Mathematical Prog. No Yes No No Yes  
 [15] Real-time satisfaction assignment Mathematical Prog. Yes No No No Yes  
 [23–25] Real-Time MPC MPC Yes No No No Yes  
 [26] Cost-minimization MPC MPC Yes Partial Yes No Yes  
 [27,28] Frequency regulation MPC MPC Yes Partial No No No  
 [29] FleetRL RL simulator Yes Yes Yes Yes No  
 [30,31] Chargym, SustainGym RL simulator Yes Partial No Yes No  
 [32] OPEN platform General simulation Yes No No Yes Yes  
 [33–35] Open V2X Simulation framework Yes No No Yes No  
 This work Proposed MPC framework MPC Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes  
1.2. Article contributions
To bridge the identified gaps, this work presents a fully open-
source implementation of MPC algorithms for smart EV charging and 
discharging.1 The framework is designed to maximize the profit of 
CPOs, while incorporating user preferences and accounting for key 
uncertainties such as inflexible loads, photovoltaic generation, and 
demand response events. In addition to the software release, a complete 
mathematical formulation of the underlying optimization problem is 
provided, ensuring full transparency and reproducibility. To the best 
of the authors’ knowledge (as shown in Table  1), this is the first 
openly available open-source MPC framework specifically tailored to 
the EV smart charging context.  Its performance is assessed through 
comprehensive simulations and is benchmarked against representa-
tive rule-based approaches and RL strategies. In summary, the main 
contributions of this study are:
• Development of flexible open-source MPC algorithms capable 
of executing various EV CPO case studies to evaluate different 
performance indicators.
• Novel formulation of an economic MPC method tailored for G2V 
and V2G real-time smart charging, strategically crafted to opti-
mize profits while accommodating uncertainties intrinsic to de-
mand response.
• Capable of handling EVs and charging stations with heteroge-
neous characteristics.
• Innovative design of the Optimal control with maximum flexi-
bility (OCMF) MPC method for G2V and V2G real-time smart 
charging, geared towards enhancing flexibility and profitability 
amidst the complexities of demand response uncertainties.
• Evaluation of the impact of smart charging strategies on the 
degradation of EV batteries.
1.3. Article organization
The structure of the article is as follows. Section 2 outlines the 
background and fundamental aspects of the EV charging management 
problem. This is followed by an in-depth presentation of smart charg-
ing strategies and their mathematical formulations in Section 3. The 
experimental setup used to evaluate the proposed methods is detailed 
in Section 4. A comprehensive evaluation and comparison with baseline 
strategies are presented in Section 5 to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
the proposed approaches. In Section 6, conclusions and potential future 
research directions are discussed.
1 Access the open-source code at https://github.com/CesarDiazLondono/
MPC-G2V-V2G and https://github.com/StavrosOrf/EV2Gym.
Fig. 1. Overview of the EV charging management system, illustrating power and infor-
mation flows between the distribution grid, inflexible household loads, PV, transformer, 
charging infrastructure, and energy markets. The CPO in the middle processes signals 
from the market, distribution grid, and EV users in order to efficiently control the 
connected EVs.
2. EV charging management
In this section, an overview of the EV charging problem and the 
simulation tool used is provided. Specifically, a comprehensive sim-
ulator platform for conducting realistic V2G simulations is discussed. 
This platform encompasses configurable simulation parameters, real-
istic EV models, efficient charging station management, and detailed 
transformer operations.
2.1. Simulation models
In a simulation, there are 𝐼 chargers, where 𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝐼, each one 
having one Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE). Each charger 𝑖
is connected to one of the 𝐺 transformers, where 𝑔 = 1, 2, … , 𝐺. There 
are also, 𝐽 EVs that connect to EVSEs during the simulation. Finally, 
a simulation consists of 𝐾 discrete time steps, where 𝑘 = 1 , 2, … , 𝐾. 
At each step, the user-selected algorithm defines the power output 𝑃𝑖,𝑘, 
for each charger 𝑖. The algorithm can fully observe the current state of 
the environment and can access future data, including electricity prices, 
load and PV forecasts, and EV schedules. Fig.  1 illustrates the simulator 
models.
Each EV 𝑗 in the simulator features customizable parameters, in-
cluding battery capacity (𝐸𝑗 ), charge (𝜂𝑐) and discharge (𝜂𝑑 ) efficiency, 
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
3 

PAGE 5
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Table 2
Battery degradation model parameters.
 𝜖0 𝜖1 𝜖2 𝜃 𝜁0 𝜁1 𝐾 𝑡𝑜𝑡 𝑄𝑎𝑐𝑐  
 6.23 ⋅ 106 1.38 ⋅ 106 6976 28 4.02 ⋅ 10−4 2.04 ⋅ 10−3 730 11 160 
minimum SoC at departure SoC𝑗,𝑑𝑗
, and maximum charging (𝑃
𝑐
𝑖 ) and 
discharging (𝑃
𝑑
𝑖 ) power limits that depend not only on the EV battery 
management system but also on the EVSE rated power.  In our use 
case, EV users communicate their expected arrival and departure times, 
along with an estimate of their SoC upon arrival. This information en-
ables the CPO to make more informed scheduling decisions, improving 
the coordination and utilization of the available charging infrastructure 
across the EV fleet.  At each time step 𝑘 EVs can arrive at a charging 
station based on realistic EV behavior probability distributions obtained 
from the ElaadNL repository [36], ensuring the simulation accurately 
reflects real-world scenarios. Therefore, an EV’s arrival time 𝑎𝑗 , depar-
ture time 𝑑𝑗 , and SoC at arrival SoC𝑎𝑗 are sampled from ElaadNL data. 
By leveraging this data, the simulator can replicate various charging 
patterns observed in different settings, such as public charging stations, 
workplaces, and residential areas.
Each transformer 𝑔 aggregates EV chargers in the set 𝛷𝑔, to simulate 
the electricity distribution network and its constraints. Additionally, 
transformers incorporate realistic data about inflexible loads, solar 
photovoltaic (PV) generation, and demand response (DR) events. For 
instance, datasets from Pecan Street [37] and Renewables.ninja [38] 
are used to model inflexible loads and PV generation profiles, re-
spectively, while information about demand response events can be 
configured by users based on specific parameters such as start time 
and duration. Transformers have operational constraints that must be 
followed. Violations of these constraints are tracked throughout the 
simulation, enabling the evaluation of charging strategies under realis-
tic operating conditions. Furthermore, the platform generates forecasts 
of inflexible loads and solar power generation to support the de-
velopment of algorithms that can handle uncertainty, enhancing the 
robustness and reliability of charging strategies in real-world scenarios.
DR mechanisms are also supported within the simulation platform. 
These can be implemented through various contractual arrangements 
between EV owners, the CPO, and the system operator. For example, 
the framework proposed in [39] introduces a three-stage process: (i) 
quantifying the potential profit that EV owners can achieve based 
on their flexibility, (ii) establishing DR contracts between the CPO 
and EV owners accordingly, and (iii) defining the profit and penalty 
sharing mechanisms among stakeholders. In the present work, we as-
sume that such contractual agreements are predefined and established 
before the simulation starts. Therefore, the negotiation and formation 
of DR contracts are considered out of the scope of this study. Instead, 
these agreements are treated as fixed inputs provided to the CPO. The 
algorithm implemented by the CPO can identify EVs with available 
flexibility for DR participation.
2.2. Battery degradation model
Users often hesitate to offer their EVs for V2G services due to 
concerns about battery degradation. For this reason, it is important to 
assess the impact of the proposed smart charging algorithms using a 
validated battery degradation model [40]. This model comprises both 
calendar (𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑙 ) and cyclic (𝑑𝑐𝑦𝑐 ) capacity loss components. For a single 
EV, based on [40], the capacity degradation attributed to calendar 
aging over a simulation with duration 𝐾 is related to the mean ̂SoC
and is described as: 
𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑙 = 0.75 ⋅ (𝜖0 ⋅ ̂SoC − 𝜖1) ⋅ exp
(
− 𝜖2
𝜃
)
⋅ 𝐾
(𝐾 𝑡𝑜𝑡)0.25 . (1)
Here, 𝐾 𝑡𝑜𝑡 denotes the battery’s age in days, 𝜃 represents the battery 
temperature (◦C), and 𝜖0, 𝜖1, 𝜖2 are constants, as shown in Table  2.
The cyclic capacity loss depends on the total energy exchanged by 
the battery and the SoC at each simulation step as: 
𝑑𝑐𝑦𝑐 =
(
𝜁0 + 𝜁1
∑| ̂SoC − SoC𝑘| 𝛥𝑡
𝐾
)
⋅
∑| 𝑃𝑘| 𝛥𝑡
√
𝑄𝑎𝑐𝑐
, (2)
where 𝑄𝑎𝑐𝑐 is the accumulated throughput during the battery’s lifetime, 
and 𝜁0, 𝜁1 are constants defined in Table  2. Therefore, the total capacity 
loss of an EV battery is the sum: 𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑙 + 𝑑𝑐𝑦𝑐 . In this work, the 
capacity loss is evaluated but not included in the vehicle model within 
the charging strategies presented in the next section.
3. Smart charging strategies
The smart charging strategies adopted by the CPO rely on the MPC 
algorithm. The proposed strategies are based on [41], in which only 
unidirectional strategies are considered. In this paper, we are proposing 
four distinct smart charging algorithms, each designed to achieve spe-
cific objectives while adhering to the MPC framework. These strategies 
include:
• eMPC G2V: Unidirectional economic MPC (eMPC) aimed at min-
imizing the operational costs of the CPO.
• eMPC V2G: Bidirectional eMPC aimed at minimizing the opera-
tional costs of the CPO.
• OCMF G2V: Unidirectional Optimal Control with Maximum Flex-
ibility (OCMF) aimed at minimizing the CPO’s operational costs 
while maximizing charger flexibility.
• OCMF V2G: Bidirectional OCMF aimed at minimizing the CPO’s 
operational costs while maximizing charger flexibility.
3.1. Solution formulation
The proposed MPC algorithms are designed to maximize CPO prof-
its, taking into consideration constrains on energy and power limits 
imposed by the grid, chargers and vehicles, the preferences of EV 
owners and the various uncertainties associated with the charging pool, 
such as the inflexible loads and the PV generation. MPC algorithm 
forms the basis of this approach, where at each time step 𝑘, an opti-
mization program is solved to determine the optimal power exchange 
between each charger in the pool 𝐼 with an EV connected, and the 
grid for an horizon of 𝐻 steps. Then, the algorithm outputs are the 
demanded and delivered charger power levels for the current time 
step 𝑘, denoted as 𝑃 𝑐∗
𝑖,𝑘 and 𝑃 𝑑∗
𝑖,𝑘 , respectively. Notice that only one of 
these power levels can be activated for every charger at each interval 
𝑘, i.e., the charger can only charge or discharge the EV at 𝑘. On the 
other hand, the plant under control is the set of EVs connected to the 
chargers. Power commands 𝑃 𝑐∗
𝑖,𝑘 and 𝑃 𝑑∗
𝑖,𝑘  are the inputs to the actual EV 
charging pool, where the SoC of the vehicles’ batteries, represented as 
𝑥𝑖,𝑘, are the system state and model outputs.
The MPC methodology involves four main steps:
1. Given the SoC of the connected vehicles at time 𝑘, build a 
prediction model to compute the evolution of the SoC of the EV 
charging pool 𝑥𝑖,𝑘+ℎ over a prediction horizon 𝐻 for any power 
profiles 𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘+ℎ and 𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘+ℎ, where ℎ = 1 , 2, … , 𝐻.
2. Optimization process to determine the future inputs 𝑃 𝑐∗
𝑖,𝑘+ℎ and 
𝑃 𝑑∗
𝑖,𝑘+ℎ, considering a cost function and operational constraints.
3. Application of the first element of the optimal power profile 𝑃 𝑐∗
𝑖,𝑘
or 𝑃 𝑑∗
𝑖,𝑘  (ℎ=0) to the chargers within the pool.
4. Wait until the next time step to measure the new system state 
𝑥𝑖,𝑘+1 and forecasted variables, such as the inflexible loads and 
the PV generation.
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
4 

PAGE 6
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Fig. 2. Flowchart of the MPC algorithm methodology.
These steps are iterated at each time step 𝑘, employing the concept 
of receding horizon. This approach involves recalculating the power 
signals 𝑃 𝑐∗
𝑖,𝑘 and 𝑃 𝑑∗
𝑖,𝑘  at each iteration, taking into account updated 
information. This methodology is illustrated in the flowchart shown in 
Fig.  2. The process begins at 𝑘 = 1 , upon receiving all EV charging 
requests, which could, for instance, be submitted through an applica-
tion by the EV owner. The four main steps of the control strategy are 
then executed sequentially. It is important to note that the predicted 
inflexible load and PV generation are updated at every time step 𝑘, and 
these updated forecasts are incorporated when solving the optimization 
problem. Although the prediction of inflexible load and PV generation 
is not the focus of this paper, they are treated as exogenous inputs to 
the control algorithm. While the accuracy of these forecasts impacts 
the MPC’s performance, its iterative closed-loop nature helps miti-
gate uncertainty through continuous feedback operation, as illustrated 
in [42]. In practice, such forecasts can be obtained from a neural 
network model running in parallel to the control loop, which updates 
its predictions whenever a new measurement becomes available. The 
equations referenced in the flowchart are presented later in the paper.
The MPC algorithm relies on a system model to predict future 
powers in the charging pool. Therefore, this model must strike a bal-
ance between precision, to factor in charger responses, and simplicity, 
to facilitate online optimization for the Real-Time (RT) operation of 
the chargers. Hence, the EV charger model depends on a signal 𝜉𝑖,𝑘
indicating whether an EV is plugged in at the 𝑘th time slot, along 
with the SoC variation of the plugged-in EV. The signal 𝜉𝑖,𝑘 is a binary 
variable, 𝜉𝑖,𝑘 = 1 if the charger 𝑖 has a plugged-in EV.
The SoC evolution on the 𝑗th EV plugged-in the charger 𝑖 (i.e., 𝜉𝑖,𝑘 =
1) is: 
𝑥𝑖,𝑘+1 = 𝑥𝑖,𝑘 + 𝛥𝑡
𝐸𝑗
(
𝜂𝑐𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 −
𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘
𝜂𝑑
)
, (3)
while the state space model for an EV charging pool considers three 
possible conditions, as: 
𝑥𝑖,𝑘+1 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
SoC𝑗,𝑎𝑗 if 𝑘 = 𝑎𝑗 ,
Eq. (3) if 𝑎𝑗 < 𝑘 < 𝑑 𝑗 ,
0 if 𝜉𝑖,𝑘=0 ∨ 𝑘=𝑑𝑗 .
(4)
The first condition corresponds to the arrival SoC, denoted as 
SoC𝑗,𝑎𝑗 . The second condition represents the evolution of the energy 
stored in the EV battery. The third condition applies when there is no 
EV connected or when an EV is departing. Note that Eq. (4) applies to 
the entire pool of 𝐼 EV chargers, rather than to an individual EV.
Then, the EV charging pool model for the time slot 𝑘 is defined as: 
̂x𝑘+1 = 𝐴𝑘 ̂x𝑘 + 𝐵𝑘 ̂P𝑘, (5)
where, the charging pool outputs, i.e., the SoC in the chargers are 
presented in the ̂x𝑘 ∈ R𝐼 , as:
̂x𝑘 = [𝑥1,𝑘 𝑥2,𝑘 … 𝑥𝐼,𝑘 ]T,
and the exchanged power pool inputs, i.e., the charging and discharging 
powers are grouped in one vector denoted ̂P𝑘 ∈ R2𝐼 , as:
̂P𝑘 = [𝑃 𝑐
1,𝑘 𝑃 𝑑
1,𝑘 𝑃 𝑐
2,𝑘 𝑃 𝑑
2,𝑘 … 𝑃 𝑐
𝐼,𝑘 𝑃 𝑑
𝐼,𝑘 ]T.
Moreover, 𝐴𝑘 = diag(𝜉𝑖,𝑘) containing information about the plugged-
in EVs in the chargers, then, 𝐴𝑘 ∈ R𝐼×𝐼 . Considering 𝑏𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 and 𝑏𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 as:
𝑏𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 =
𝜉𝑖,𝑘𝛥𝑡𝜂𝑐
𝐸𝑗
∧ 𝑏𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 =
𝜉𝑖,𝑘𝛥𝑡
𝐸𝑗 𝜂𝑑 , (6)
the matrix 𝐵𝑘 ∈ R𝐼×2𝐼 is generated as: 
𝐵𝑘=
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑏𝑐
1,𝑘 −𝑏𝑑
1,𝑘 0 0 ⋯ ⋯ 0 0
0 0 𝑏𝑐
2,𝑘 −𝑏𝑑
2,𝑘 0 0 0 0
⋮ ⋮ 0 0 ⋱ ⋱ 0 0
0 0 0 0 ⋯ ⋯ 𝑏𝑐
𝐼,𝑘 −𝑏𝑑
𝐼,𝑘
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
. (7)
Note that the model in Eq. (5) accounts for all chargers during time 
slot 𝑘. For the prediction horizon 𝐻, the MPC algorithm utilizes the 
following prediction model. 
X = Âx𝑘 + GP, (8)
where, 
X=
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
̂x𝑘+1
̂x𝑘+2
⋮
̂x𝑘+𝐻
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
, P =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
̂P𝑘
̂P𝑘+1
⋮
̂P𝑘+𝐻−1
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
, A =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝐴𝑘
𝐴𝑘𝐴𝑘+1
⋮
𝐴𝑘 ⋯ 𝐴𝑘+𝐻−1
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
,
G=
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝐵𝑘 0 0 0
𝐴𝑘+1𝐵𝑘 𝐵𝑘+1 0 0
⋮ ⋮ ⋱ 0
𝐴𝑘+1 ⋯ 𝐴𝑘+𝐻−1𝐵𝑘 𝐴𝑘+2 ⋯ 𝐴𝑘+𝐻−1𝐵𝑘+1 ⋯ 𝐵𝑘+𝐻−1
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
(9)
The algorithm considers the constraint that the SoC at the departure 
time 𝑑𝑗 of each EV must be within predetermined bounds, i.e., the 
minimum SoC𝑗,𝑑𝑗
 and maximum SoC𝑗,𝑑𝑗 SoC levels specified by the EV 
owner. 
SoC𝑗,𝑑𝑗
≤ 𝑥𝑖,𝑑𝑗 ≤ SoC𝑗,𝑑𝑗 (10)
The SoC in the charger is always positive and depends on the 
maximum capacity 𝑥𝑖 of the plugged-in EV battery, as: 
𝑥𝑖,𝑘 ≤ 𝑥𝑖,𝑘 ≤ 𝑥𝑖,𝑘. (11)
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
5 

PAGE 7
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
To avoid deep discharges in the EV battery, a minimum SoC level 
is defined: 
𝑥𝑖,𝑘=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
𝑆𝑜𝐶 𝑗,𝑎𝑗 if 𝑘 = 𝑎𝑗 ,
𝑥𝑖,𝑘−1 if 𝜉𝑖,𝑘=1 ∧ 𝑥𝑖,𝑘−1 < 𝑆𝑜𝐶 𝑗,𝑚𝑖𝑛 ,
𝑆𝑜𝐶𝑗,𝑚𝑖𝑛 if 𝜉𝑖,𝑘=1 ∧ 𝑥𝑖,𝑘−1 > 𝑆𝑜𝐶 𝑗,𝑚𝑖𝑛 ,
0 if 𝜉𝑖,𝑘=0.
(12)
The first condition for the minimum SoC assumes the arrival SoC 
at the time of arrival. The second and third conditions depend on the 
minimum state of charge, 𝑆𝑜𝐶𝑗,𝑚𝑖𝑛 , which represents the threshold at 
which an EV is allowed to discharge. Consequently, if the actual SoC 
of the EV is below this threshold, the minimum SoC remains at the 
actual SoC level until the threshold is reached. Once the threshold is 
exceeded, the EV battery can be discharged up to the threshold. The 
final condition applies when no EV is plugged in.
The algorithm is capable of reacting to RT market signals, including 
fluctuations in price and demand response (DR) events. Specifically, DR 
requests are represented by the variable 𝑃 𝐷𝑅
𝑘 , allowing the algorithm 
to promptly respond to market requests as they occur.
The power limit imposed by the each transformer is specified as 𝛹𝑔, 
then the balance equation for transformer 𝑔 is constrained as 
∑
𝜙𝑔,𝑘 + ̃𝑙𝑔,𝑘 − ̃𝑤𝑔,𝑘 ≤ 𝛹𝑔 − 𝑃 𝐷𝑅
𝑔,𝑘 (13)
where the net power consumed/supplied by the chargers connected to 
transformer 𝑔 is 𝜙𝑔,𝑘 = 𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 − 𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘, ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝛷𝑔, and 𝛷𝑔 denotes the set of 
EV chargers connected to cluster 𝑔. ̃𝑙𝑔,𝑘 is the predicted inflexible load, 
̃𝑤𝑔,𝑘 is the predicted PV generation and 𝑃 𝐷𝑅
𝑔,𝑘  is the demand response 
command is case of a market request.
In the following subsections, the MPC algorithms followed by the 
EV CPO are presented.
3.2. eMPC: EV CPO cost minimization
This strategy, known as eMPC, seeks to minimize the operational 
costs of the CPO for the horizon 𝐻, by optimizing the EV charging 
profiles of the pool the interval [𝑘, 𝑘 + 𝐻]. The algorithm’s decisions 
rely on the RT energy prices 𝜋𝑐
𝑘 and 𝜋𝑑
𝑘 for charging and discharging, re-
spectively. Therefore, the cost function for V2G in eMPC is formulated 
as follows: 
𝑂𝐶𝑀
𝑘 = 𝜋𝑐
𝑘
𝐼∑
𝑖=1
𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 − 𝜋𝑑
𝑘
𝐼∑
𝑖=1
𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 (14)
Then, the EV CPO deals with the following eMPC V2G problem: 
min
𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘,𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘,𝑧𝑖,𝑘
𝛥𝑡
𝐻−1∑
𝑘=0
𝑂𝐶𝑀
𝑘 (15a)
s.t. Eqs. (4), (10), (11), (13)
0 ≤ 𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 ≤ 𝑃
𝑐
𝑖 𝑧𝑖,𝑘
0 ≤ 𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 ≤ 𝑃
𝑑
𝑖 (1 − 𝑧𝑖,𝑘) (15b)
∀ 𝑘 = 1, 2, … , 𝐻, 𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝐼,
𝑗 = 1, 2, … , 𝐽 , 𝑔 = 1, 2, … , 𝐺.
The decision variables of the problem include the charging (𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘) and 
discharging (𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘) power profiles, and the binary variables 𝑧𝑖,𝑘, which 
determines whether charging or discharging is performed during time 
slot 𝑘. Both the charging and discharging powers are constrained to 
be between zero and their respective maximum powers, denoted as 𝑃
𝑐
𝑖
and 𝑃
𝑑
𝑖 , respectively. Note that problem (15a) is a Mixed-Integer Linear 
Program (MILP), for which efficient solvers are available.
Notice that this eMPC problem also applies to the G2V strategy, with 
the only difference being the absence of the remuneration price 𝜋𝑑
𝑘 since 
𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 is always zero. Similarly, the binary variable 𝑧𝑖,𝑘 is not required, 
resulting in a much simpler Linear Program (LP), with fewer decision 
variables.
3.3. OCMF: CPO flexibility maximization
This strategy denoted as OCMF, aims to achieve two objectives 
simultaneously. Firstly, it aims to minimize the operational cost of the 
charging pools, as presented in Eq. (14). Secondly, it aims to maximize 
the flexibility of the chargers’ power.
The base definitions of the charger flexibility for G2V charging 
strategies were proposed in [41] as follows:
• Upward flexibility: This refers to the power increase a charger 
can deviate from the nominal dispatched power, reducing the 
charging time of the EV.
• Downward flexibility: This refers to the power reduction a charger 
can deviate from the nominal dispatched power. This flexibility 
can be utilized up to a later time slot when the EV needs to be 
charged to achieve the required SoC by its departure time.
Then, the G2V upward 𝐹 𝑐𝑢
𝑖,𝑘 and downward 𝐹 𝑐𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 flexibilities that each 
EV charger can provide are depicted in Fig.  3. Then, we propose to 
define the charging flexibility 𝐹 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 as the minimum flexibility between 
upward and downward, as, 
𝐹 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 = min{𝐹 𝑐𝑢
𝑖,𝑘, 𝐹 𝑐𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 }, (16)
In line with the charging flexibility discussed earlier, we introduce 
a discharging V2G flexibility 𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘, designed to adjust the discharging 
power either upwards or downwards as needed by the CPO. Thus, 
to maximize both the upward 𝐹 𝑑𝑢
𝑖,𝑘 and downward 𝐹 𝑑𝑑
𝑖,𝑘  discharging 
flexibilities, we consider the minimum of both as, 
𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 = min{𝐹 𝑑𝑢
𝑖,𝑘 , 𝐹 𝑑𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 }, (17)
Note that only one of the charging or discharging flexibilities can 
be offered at each sample time when the EV is either charging or dis-
charging. However, when the charger power is zero, both the charging 
and discharging flexibilities are available (refer to Fig.  3). Furthermore, 
flexibility is not available after the time 𝑑𝑚 as the EV must be charged 
to reach the EV owner’s requested SoC upon departure.
Therefore, the second objective of the OCMF, which aims to maxi-
mize the chargers’ flexibility, is formulated as follows: 
𝑂𝐹 𝑀
𝑘 = 𝜋𝑐
𝑘,Flex
𝐼∑
𝑖=1
𝐹 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 + 𝜋𝑑
𝑘,Flex
𝐼∑
𝑖=1
𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘, (18)
where, the 𝜋𝑐
𝑘,Flex and 𝜋𝑑
𝑘,Flex are the incentive prices for offering flexi-
bility.
The EV CPO addresses the following OCMF V2G problem: 
min 𝛥𝑡
𝐻−1∑
𝑘=0
(𝑂𝐶𝑀
𝑘 − 𝑂𝐹 𝑀
𝑘
) (19a)
s.t. Eqs. (4), (10), (11), (13)
𝐹 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 ≤ 𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 ≤
(
𝑃
𝑐
𝑖 − 𝐹 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘
)
𝑧𝑖,𝑘
𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 ≤ 𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 ≤
(
𝑃
𝑑
𝑖 − 𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘
)
(1 − 𝑧𝑖,𝑘)
0 ≤ 𝐹 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 ≤ 𝑃
𝑐
𝑖 (19b)
0 ≤ 𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 ≤ 𝑃
𝑑
𝑖
∀ 𝑘=1, 2, … , 𝐻, 𝑖 =1, 2, … , 𝐼,
𝑗=1, 2, … , 𝐽 , 𝑔 =1, 2, … , 𝐺.
The decision variables of this problem are the charging 𝑃 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘 and 
discharging 𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 power, the binary variable 𝑧𝑖,𝑘, and the charging 𝐹 𝑐
𝑖,𝑘
and discharging 𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 flexibilities. The charging and discharging powers 
are constrained by the charger flexibility, with the charging and dis-
charging flexibilities restricted to positive values and bounded between 
zero and the maximum power.
Notice that as in the eMPC problem, this OCMF problem also applies 
to the G2V strategy, with the difference being the absence of the 
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
6 

PAGE 8
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Fig. 3. Flexibility in an EV charger, considering G2V and V2G strategies.
Algorithm 1 Simulation Example using eMPC V2G
1: from EV2Gym.ev2gym_env import EV2Gym
2: from ocmf_mpc import OCMF_V2G, OCMF_G2V
3: from eMPC import eMPC_V2G, eMPC_G2V
4: config_file = ‘‘config.yaml’’ ⊳ Configuration file path
5: env = EV2Gym(config_file) ⊳ Initialize simulation
6: 𝒔0 = env.reset()
7: agent = eMPC_V2G(env, control_horizon=𝐻)
8: for 𝑘 in 0, 1, . . . , 𝐾  do
9:  𝒂1,…,𝐼 = agent.get_action(𝒔𝑘) ⊳ MPC optimization
10:  𝒔𝑘+1, stats = env.step(𝒂1,…,𝐼 ) ⊳ Simulate
11: end for
12: profits, total energy charged, ... = stats
remuneration price 𝜋𝑑
𝑘 since 𝑃 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘 is always zero, the lack of the price 
𝜋𝑑
𝑘,Flex, the flexibility 𝐹 𝑑
𝑖,𝑘, and the binary variable 𝑧𝑖,𝑘.
As a final remark, while the SoC dynamics are linear, the overall for-
mulation is a MILP due to binary variables enforcing mutually exclusive 
charging/discharging actions (see Eqs.  (15b) and (19b)). The resulting 
combinatorial structure, efficiently solvable by modern MILP solvers, 
is naturally integrated within the MPC framework, enabling adaptive, 
real-time control based on updated forecasts and system states, key 
features for V2G energy management.
4. Experimental setup
In this section, we describe how to integrate the execution of an 
EV2Gym [43] simulation, introduced in Section 2, with the proposed 
MPC algorithms. Alg. 1 outlines the Python code necessary to run a 
simulation utilizing the eMPC_V2G strategy. Initially, the simulator 
class EV2Gym (line 1) and the developed MPC classes OCMF_V2G,
OCMF_G2V, eMPC_V2G, and eMPC_G2V (lines 2 and 3) are imported. 
Lines 5 and 6 initialize the simulation environment using a user-defined 
configuration file (config_file). Subsequently, the MPC algorithm’s 
variables are set up in line 7, allowing users to customize the control 
horizon 𝐻 as needed. The MPC algorithms are implemented using the 
Gurobi solver.
The main simulation loop, spanning 𝐾 steps, commences there-
after. Firstly, charging and discharging actions 𝒂1,…,𝐼 for each charging 
station 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 are determined by executing the MPC algorithm’s opti-
mization process (line 9), using the current state (𝒔𝑘) of the simulation 
as input. The state 𝒔𝑘 includes essential information such as EVs’ SoC, 
time of arrival and departure, load and PV forecasts, facilitating the 
decision-making algorithm’s optimization. The actions vector 𝒂1, … , 𝐼
is constrained within the [−1, 1]𝐼 interval, where −1 denotes maximum 
power discharge, 1 signifies maximum power charging, and 0 indicates 
Table 3
General simulation parameters.
 Name Symbol Value  
 Sample time [min] 𝛥𝑡 15  
 Operation time of the station [h] 𝑇 24  
 Prediction horizon (2.5 h–10 h) 𝐻 {2.5 × 4 , 10 × 4} 
 Number of EVSEs 𝐼 {5–50}  
 Number of EVs 𝐽 {15–120}  
 Number of transformers 𝐺 {1, 3}  
 Discharge price multiplier 𝑚 {0.8–1.2}  
 EV scenario ‘‘Residential’’  
no action. Subsequently, a simulation step is taken (env.step()) 
utilizing the action vector 𝐚1, … , 𝐼 as a parameter (line 10). Each step 
yields the subsequent simulation state 𝒔𝑘+1, while the final step (𝑘 = 𝐾) 
also provides simulation evaluation statistics (stats) such as total 
profits (e), total energy charged and discharged (kWh), execution time 
(s), and total battery degradation (line 12). These metrics are important 
for evaluating the efficacy of smart charging algorithms.
4.1. Experimental configuration
The EV2Gym simulator allows for complete configuration of the 
dynamics of the simulation by modifying the configuration file. Table 
3 showcases the general simulation parameters and the values used 
for the experiments, while Fig.  1 visualizes the experimental setup 
comprised of EVs, EVSEs, and transformers, inflexible loads, PVs, etc. 
Specifically, each simulation lasts 24 h, with discrete time steps set at 
15 min. Each simulation contains the connection of 5 to 60 EVSEs to 
either 1 or 3 transformers, accommodating a fleet size ranging from 15 
to 120 EVs, as determined by the experimental setups. The EVs’ time 
of arrival, time of departure, and arrival SoC are based on residential 
EV transaction data from ElaadNL [36]. Also, the discharge price is 
based on the charge price and multiplier 𝑚, thus 𝜋𝑑
𝑘 = 𝑚 ⋅ 𝜋𝑐
𝑘. The 
charging prices used in these simulations are based on the historic 
Dutch day-ahead prices [44].
Furthermore, the default model parameters, such as transformer 
power limit, EVSE, and EV characteristics, can be found in Table  4. 
Specifically, the transformer power limit of 400 kW reflects typical 
values found in low-voltage distribution networks in residential areas, 
while the EV battery capacity of 50 kWh corresponds to the median 
capacity of commercially available EV models in Europe [36]. The sim-
ulator also provides forecasts of the loads using a Gaussian distribution 
(̄𝑙𝑔,𝑘 =  (𝜇, 𝜎)) with mean the 𝜇 = 100%× 𝑙𝑔,𝑘 of the actual load at time 𝑘
and standard deviation 𝜎 = 5% × 𝑙𝑔,𝑘 of it. Similarly, for PV generation 
forecasts ̄𝑤𝑔,𝑘. Moreover, tool users have the flexibility to customize 
demand response events by specifying parameters such as the number 
of events, capacity reduction, duration, and notification time. The start 
time of events follows a Gaussian distribution with a mean of 18:00 
and a standard deviation of 1 h.
5. Experimental results
In this section, a thorough experimental assessment of the proposed 
MPC strategies is presented. Initially, a detailed examination of a single 
case study is visualized to understand the behavior of each baseline 
charging algorithm. Subsequently, the scope is extended by conduct-
ing multiple simulations to show average performance, facilitating 
a comparative analysis across the main evaluation metrics including 
profitability, flexibility, and battery degradation. Finally, an evaluation 
of the computational costs associated with the proposed methods is 
conducted, thereby providing a holistic perspective on their efficacy.
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
7 

PAGE 9
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Fig. 4. Comparison of baselines, including rule-based and RL algorithms, and the proposed MPC approaches for a case study with 30 EVSEs connected to a single transformer, 
and around 75 EVs. The zoomed box highlights how MPC respects the demand response event power limit while rule-based algorithms fail.
Table 4
Default simulation model parameters.
 Name Symbol Value 
 Transformer power limit [kW] 𝛹 400  
 Maximum EVSE output power [kW] 𝑃
𝑐
, 𝑃
𝑑
22  
 EVSE voltage (V) 𝑉 230  
 EVSE phases 𝜙 3  
 EV battery capacity [kWh] 𝐸𝑗 50  
 Maximum EV power [kW] 𝑃
𝑐
, 𝑃
𝑑
22  
 Minimum EV SoC when discharging SoC𝑗 , 𝑚𝑖𝑛 10%  
 Minimum EV SoC at departure SoC𝑗 , 𝑑𝑗 80%  
 Minimum EV time of connection [h] 3  
 Charging efficiency 𝜂𝑐 100% 
 Discharging efficiency 𝜂𝑑 100% 
 Load and PV forecast error – 5%  
 DR capacity reduction – 20%  
 DR event duration [h] – 1  
 DR event start time [h] – 18 ± 1 
5.1. Baseline charging algorithms
In this study, multiple baselines are compared with the proposed 
MPC algorithms. Initially, two simpler rule-based algorithms are used: 
the charge as fast as possible strategy (AFAP), and charge as late as 
possible strategy (ALAP). As their name suggests, AFAP fully charges the 
EVs to their desired capacity as soon as they connect, while ALAP waits 
to start charging right before the EV leaves (still charging up to desired 
SoC). Moreover, two state-of-the-art RL algorithms are implemented, 
the Soft Actor Critic (SAC) and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). 
The RL algorithms are trained using default parameters as described 
in [43]. 
5.2. Single case study comparison
To evaluate the proposed MPC methods, their performance was 
compared against baseline strategies within a single case study. In 
Fig.  4(d), a detailed comparison is provided between the rule-based 
strategies (AFAP and ALAP), RL baselines (PPO and SAC), and the 
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
8 

PAGE 10
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Table 5
Averages of 50 runs with 10 EVSEs, 25 EVs, 1 transformer, and varying EV behavior.
 Algorithm Profits (e) User
satisfaction (%)
Charged
energy (kWh)
Discharged
energy (kWh)
∑𝑄lost
(×10−4)
∑𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑙
(×10−4)
∑𝑑𝑐𝑦𝑐
(×10−4)
 
 Rule based AFAP −47.6 ± 8.4 100.0 ± 0.0 227 ± 38 – 12.4 ± 1.6 3.5 ± 0.2 8.8 ± 1.5  
 ALAP −46 ± 11 100.0 ± 0.0 227 ± 38 – 12.2 ± 2.2 2.8 ± 0.4 9.4 ± 2.0  
 RL PPO 15 ± 3 59.0 ± 5.9 3 ± 1 61 ± 11 8.7 ± 1.3 2.7 ± 0.4 6.0 ± 1.1  
 SAC −3 ± 12 62.3 ± 1.3 186 ± 42 138 ± 28 15.8 ± 2.3 2.8 ± 0.4 13.0 ± 2.0 
 MPC OCMF G2V −48.0 ± 8.3 100.0 ± 0.0 227 ± 38 – 12.8 ± 1.6 3.3 ± 0.2 9.5 ± 1.5  
 OCMF V2G 11.9 ± 8.8 100.0 ± 0.0 927 ± 73 706 ± 63 36.8 ± 2.7 3.1 ± 0.2 33.7 ± 2.5 
 eMPC G2V −43.9 ± 7.6 100.0 ± 0.0 227 ± 38 – 13.3 ± 1.7 3.3 ± 0.2 10.0 ± 1.6 
 eMPC V2G 50.8 ± 10.3 100.0 ± 0.0 1390 ± 119 1172 ± 107 57.1 ± 4.8 3.2 ± 0.2 53.9 ± 4.5 
MPC variants with a prediction horizon of 10 h (𝐻 = 40 ). The eval-
uation was conducted across four key dimensions: pricing dynamics, 
EV SoC, power output at the charging station level, and aggregated 
transformer-level power flow.
Fig.  4(a) depicts the charging and discharging prices observed dur-
ing the simulation day, with slightly elevated discharging prices to 
encourage V2G operations. In Fig.  4(b), the SoC evolution of EVs con-
nected to a single EVSE is illustrated, where distinct charging patterns 
are observed, highlighting the profit-oriented behavior of eMPC and the 
flexibility-driven behavior of OCMF. The corresponding power output 
profile of the same EVSE is shown in Fig.  4(c), where the eMPC strategy 
consistently reaches the maximum power capacity (22 kW), whereas 
OCMF typically operates at around 11 kW, reflecting its objective to 
enhance flexibility. As illustrated, the RL method fails to solve the 
optimal EV-charging problem efficiently, as it prioritizes discharging 
to maximize profit but misses the target SoC by departure. Finally, 
the aggregated power output of approximately 75 EVs connected to 
30 EVSEs over the course of a day is shown in Fig.  4(d). This analysis 
includes inflexible loads, PV generation, and a demand response event. 
It can be observed that both rule-based and RL baselines lead to 
potential transformer overloads due to the lack of explicit constraint 
enforcement. In contrast, the proposed MPC methods successfully main-
tain transformer loading within safe operational limits by optimally 
managing power limits. 
5.3. Performance analysis
In the previous section, the performance was shown for a single 
case study. However, a comprehensive assessment is necessary across 
various scenarios. Table  5 presents the mean and standard deviation 
derived from 50 statistical runs across a configuration comprising 10
bidirectional chargers linked to one transformer, around 25 EVs per 
simulation, and discharge price multiplier 𝑚 = 1 .2. These case studies 
included elements such as inflexible loads, PV generation, and demand 
response events, thereby mirroring real-world optimization challenges. 
Across all scenarios, the MPC methods employed a 10-step prediction 
horizon (i.e., 2.5 h, 𝐻 = 10) to drive their decision-making processes.
Table  5 illustrates that across all G2V approaches (AFAP, ALAP, 
OCMF G2V, and eMPC G2V), the average energy consumption re-
mains consistent at approximately 227 ± 38 kWh. Among these, OCMF 
G2V stands out for its consistent ability to maximize flexibility, en-
abling rapid responses to demand response events. In contrast, eMPC 
G2V demonstrates superior cost efficiency, reducing average charg-
ing expenses from e48 to e43.9. While the direct cost savings of 
eMPC G2V over OCMF G2V are modest (around e4), the trade-off 
highlights the strategic value of OCMF G2V in delivering system-
level flexibility, which is often prioritized in grid-support scenarios. 
When V2G capabilities are enabled, both OCMF V2G and eMPC V2G 
achieve notable profitability, yielding average profits of approximately 
e11.9 and e50.8, respectively. These results underscore the potential 
of V2G strategies not only to support the grid but also to generate 
meaningful economic returns. By contrast, RL methods achieve compar-
atively lower charging costs; however, this is accompanied by reduced 
Fig. 5. Histogram of average battery capacity loss per EV after one day for five 
charging methods; the 𝑥-axis shows percent loss and the 𝑦-axis its chance, with colors 
matching the legend.
user satisfaction. Specifically, RL policies often fail to enforce hard 
constraints such as ensuring full battery charge upon vehicle depar-
ture. As highlighted in prior studies, RL requires meticulous reward 
shaping, constraint handling, and extensive hyperparameter tuning to 
perform reliably in practical settings. This sensitivity limits its out-
of-the-box applicability in real-world deployments without additional 
methodological safeguards. 
Moreover, it is crucial to evaluate the impact of the methods on total 
battery degradation. Table  5 provides insights into the total battery 
capacity lost (𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑡) during the simulation for all EVs, split into calendar 
aging (𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑙 ) and cyclic degradation (𝑑𝑐𝑦𝑐 ) components, while Fig.  5 
presents histograms of the average percentage capacity loss per EV 
(10−4 ×100%) for the best-performing algorithms. RL and the rule-based 
ALAP methods are excluded from this analysis due to their suboptimal 
performance in earlier evaluations. Remarkably, V2G methods tend to 
mitigate calendar aging due to their maintenance of a lower average 
SoC during the charging phase. However, this advantage is counter-
balanced by substantially higher cyclic degradation values (up to 45 ×
10−4 higher), stemming from their utilization of EV batteries for both 
charging and discharging, totaling 2562 kWh—2335 kWh more than 
G2V methods. Conversely, all G2V methods display comparable battery 
degradation (≈13 × 10 −4), with OCMF G2V offering maximal flexibil-
ity and eMPC G2V focusing on minimizing charging costs. Overall, 
these findings underscore the capabilities of the proposed algorithms 
and their intricate trade-offs among profits, flexibility, and battery 
degradation.
5.4. Cost sensitivity analysis
In the previous experiments, it was observed that V2G methods can 
yield profits when the discharge price multiplier is set to 𝑚 = 1 .2; 
however, a sensitivity analysis under alternative pricing scenarios is 
needed to assess the robustness of this result. In each scenario, the price 
is defined as: 
𝜋𝑑
𝑘 = 𝑚 ⋅ 𝜋𝑐
𝑘, (20)
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
9 

PAGE 11
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Fig. 6. Comparison of EV-user charging costs across different discharge price multipliers (𝑚). Note that these figures solely reflect EV-user payments. However, it is important to 
acknowledge that potential profits from flexibility provision are not included here, which could significantly boost overall profits.
for 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝑇 . Fig.  6 illustrates the probability density functions of the 
total costs and profits for 50 statistical runs for each price scenario. In 
every scenario, the G2V and AFAP methods have the same distribution 
since they are not affected by the discharging prices. As observed in Fig. 
6, the eMPC_V2G strategy always provides the highest cost reductions 
(𝑚 = 0 .8, 0.9) and the highest profits (𝑚 = 1 , 1.1, 1.2). OCMF_V2G is 
also profitable in all cases except 𝑚 = 0 .8, showcasing on average 
around e 10 higher charging costs; this happens because the cost of 
providing flexibility was less than discharging, hence leading to this 
behavior. Notice that in this cost/profit analysis of the OCMF strategy, 
the payments for flexibility have not been included. Additionally, the 
costs or profits are considered from the side of the CPO; hence, the 
costs of individual EV owners are not evaluated and are considered 
out-of-scope in this study. Therefore, it can be inferred that this strategy 
would significantly increase its profits when the flexibility offered and 
provided is considered.
5.5. Computational cost
The proposed MPC methods are designed to efficiently address 
real-time EV smart-charging challenges. However, it should be noted 
that execution time increases as the number of decision variables and 
constraints grows. To evaluate the computational performance of each 
method, execution times were measured using a high-performance 
hardware configuration. Specifically, an ‘‘AMD RYZEN 7 5700X 8-
Core’’ processor with 32 GB of RAM was employed, along with the 
Gurobi 11 solver. Fig.  7 presents a comparison of the average per-step 
execution times across multiple case studies, involving scenarios with 
5 to 60 EVSEs connected to three transformers. The reported execution 
time includes all computational steps for the MPC algorithms: matrix 
construction, model formulation with constraints, and solution of the 
optimization problem, with the MIP gap parameter set to zero,2 while 
it only includes the inference time of RL algorithms, as training the 
RL models is performed offline only once. As shown in Fig.  7(a), a 
gradual increase in per-step execution time is observed when a 10-
step prediction horizon is used. In contrast, Fig.  7(b) reveals a more 
pronounced growth in execution time for a 30-step prediction horizon. 
As expected, the OCMF V2G method exhibits the largest increase in 
computational time across both scenarios, due to its higher number of 
2 Note that increasing the MIP gap can substantially reduce execution time, 
albeit at the expense of solution quality.
decision variables. Importantly, the G2V variants demonstrate slower 
scaling behavior, requiring approximately half the execution time of 
their V2G counterparts. Even in the worst-case scenario, the execution 
time of the MPC algorithm remains below 1.5% of the control strategy’s 
time step, indicating sufficient space for real-time deployment with 
larger EVSE fleets. Additionally, note that for the tested scenarios rang-
ing up to 60 EVSEs, only a few (2–3) gigabytes of memory are required, 
indicating that memory is not a limiting factor at this scale. However, 
we acknowledge that for significantly larger systems, memory usage 
may become more critical, and this is highlighted as a consideration 
for future scalability assessments. 
6. Conclusions
In this paper, four model predictive control variants were devel-
oped and tested for real-time smart charging of EV in both G2V and 
V2G modes. These controllers incorporated transformer capacity con-
straints, demand response events, and dynamic electricity pricing. The 
open-source implementation was evaluated extensively in scenarios 
with up to thirty EVSE. The results showed that the proposed model 
predictive control methods significantly reduced violations of trans-
former power limits and provided improved economic performance 
compared to rule-based and RL approaches. Furthermore, a compre-
hensive analysis of battery degradation indicated that the V2G-enabled 
controllers consistently maintained daily capacity loss below 0.005%, 
while achieving a balance between operational flexibility and prof-
itability. These findings demonstrated the practicality and scalability of 
the proposed approach for real-world deployment in distributed electric 
vehicle charging systems. 
Future work could integrate battery degradation directly into the 
MPC model to balance short-term profit and long-term battery health. 
Evaluating the framework in other settings, such as DC fast chargers, 
workplaces, or public infrastructure, would test its generalizability 
and real-time performance under different conditions. Additionally, 
analyzing the charging process from the user’s perspective, includ-
ing costs, incentives, and behavior, would enable more personalized 
and economically transparent strategies.  Moreover, while existing 
open-source platforms for EV aggregation in V2X applications provide 
valuable tools, they generally lack integration with region-specific mar-
ket regulations and power system operator contracts. These regulatory 
frameworks differ substantially across jurisdictions, such as the US, 
Canada, the EU, and China, and their impact on aggregation poten-
tial, operational constraints, and business models remains insufficiently 
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
10 

PAGE 12
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
Fig. 7. Average step execution time for varying control horizons and EVSEs.
studied. Exploring this regulatory dimension could uncover key lim-
itations and opportunities, making it a promising avenue for future 
research. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Cesar Diaz-Londono: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Software, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. 
Stavros Orfanoudakis: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Visualization, Methodology, Conceptualization. Pedro P. Ver-
gara: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Project administration, 
Funding acquisition. Peter Palensky: Funding acquisition. Fredy Ruiz: 
Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization. Giambattista Gruosso: 
Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
Cesar was granted by Politecnico di Milano within the IDEA League 
Alliance through the IDEA League Fellowship Exchange Program 2023. 
Cesar was funded by FSE-REACT EU, PON ‘‘RICERCA e INNOVAZIONE’’ 
2014–2020, Azione IV.6 (Green). Stavros is funded by the HORIZON 
Europe Drive2X Project 101056934.
Data availability
We made the code open source.
References
[1] K.M. Tan, V.K. Ramachandaramurthy, J.Y. Yong, Integration of electric vehicles 
in smart grid: A review on vehicle to grid technologies and optimization 
techniques, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 53 (2016) 720–732.
[2] A. Dubey, S. Santoso, Electric vehicle charging on residential distribution 
systems: Impacts and mitigations, IEEE Access 3 (2015) 1871–1893.
[3] L. Shi, T. Lv, Y. Wang, Vehicle-to-grid service development logic and manage-
ment formulation, J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy 7 (4) (2019) 935–947, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40565-018-0464-7.
[4] A. Allehyani, A. Ajabnoor, M. Alharbi, Chapter 14 - demand response scheme 
for electric vehicles charging in smart power systems with 100% of renewable 
energy, in: S. Chenniappan, S. Padmanaban, S. Palanisamy (Eds.), Power Systems 
Operation with 100% Renewable Energy Sources, Elsevier, 2024, pp. 247–268, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-15578-9.00016-9.
[5] W. Abdelfattah, A.S. Abdelhamid, H.M. Hasanien, B.A.-E. Rashad, Smart vehicle-
to-grid integration strategy for enhancing distribution system performance and 
electric vehicle profitability, Energy 302 (2024) 131807, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.energy.2024.131807.
[6] A.F. Güven, Integrating electric vehicles into hybrid microgrids: A stochastic 
approach to future-ready renewable energy solutions and management, Energy 
303 (2024) 131968, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2024.131968.
[7] A. Nouri, A. Lachheb, L. El Amraoui, Optimizing efficiency of vehicle-to-grid 
system with intelligent management and ANN-PSO algorithm for battery electric 
vehicles, Electr. Power Syst. Res. 226 (2024) 109936, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.epsr.2023.109936.
[8] G. Srihari, R.S.R. Krishnam Naidu, P. Falkowski-Gilski, P. Bidare Divakarachari, 
R. Kiran Varma Penmatsa, Integration of electric vehicle into smart grid: a meta 
heuristic algorithm for energy management between V2G and G2V, Front. Energy 
Res. Volume 12 - 2024 (2024) http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2024.1357863.
[9] S.A. Finecomess, G. Gebresenbet, W.Y. Zada, Y. Mulugeta, A. Addisie, Optimiza-
tion of vehicle-to-grid, grid-to-vehicle, and vehicle-to-everything systems using 
artificial bee colony optimization, Energies 18 (8) (2025) http://dx.doi.org/10.
3390/en18082046.
[10] Majed, N.K. Roy, A. Ahmed, Optimizing the load curve through V2G technology 
for sustainable energy management, Energy Rep. 13 (2025) 5848–5863, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2025.04.066.
[11] S. Orfanoudakis, V. Robu, E.M. Salazar Duque, et al., Scalable reinforcement 
learning for large-scale coordination of electric vehicles using graph neural 
networks, 2024, Preprint (Version 1) available at Research Square. URL https:
//doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-5504138/v1. (Accessed 19 December 2024).
[12] S. Orfanoudakis, N.K. Panda, P. Palensky, P.P. Vergara, GNN-DT: Graph neural 
network enhanced decision transformer for efficient optimization in dynamic 
environments, 2025, arXiv:2502.01778.
[13] M.N. Boukoberine, M.F. Zia, T. Berghout, M. Benbouzid, Reinforcement learning-
based energy management for hybrid electric vehicles: A comprehensive 
up-to-date review on methods, challenges, and research gaps, Energy AI 21 
(2025) 100514, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egyai.2025.100514.
[14] PRAFT and RPBFT: A class of blockchain consensus algorithm and their appli-
cations in electric vehicles charging scenarios for V2G networks, Internet Things 
Cyber-Phys. Syst. 3 (2023) 61–70, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.iotcps.2023.02.
003.
[15] S.H. Shamsdin, A. Seifi, M. Rostami-Shahrbabaki, B. Rahrovi, Plug-in electric 
vehicle optimization and management charging in a smart parking lot, in: 
2019 IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference, TPEC 2019, Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2019, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPEC.
2019.8662169.
[16] K. Schulte, J. Haubrock, Linear programming to increase the directly used 
photovoltaic power for charging several electric vehicles, in: 2021 IEEE Madrid 
PowerTech, PowerTech 2021 - Conference Proceedings, Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers Inc., 2021, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/POWERTECH46648.
2021.9494914.
[17] I. Sengor, O. Erdinc, B. Yener, A. Tascikaraoglu, J.P. Catalao, Optimal energy 
management of EV parking lots under peak load reduction based DR programs 
considering uncertainty, IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy 10 (3) (2019) 1034–1043, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSTE.2018.2859186.
[18] P. Meenakumar, M. Aunedi, G. Strbac, Optimal business case for provision of 
grid services through EVs with V2G capabilities, in: 2020 15th International 
Conference on Ecological Vehicles and Renewable Energies, EVER 2020, Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2020, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
EVER48776.2020.9242538.
[19] F. Giordano, C. Diaz-Londono, G. Gruosso, Comprehensive aggregator method-
ology for EVs in V2G operations and electricity markets, IEEE Open J. Veh. 
Technol. 4 (2023) 809–819, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJVT.2023.3323087.
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
11 

PAGE 13
C. Diaz-Londono et al.
[20] X. Jiang, S. Wang, Q. Zhao, X. Wang, Optimized dispatching method for 
flexibility improvement of AC-MTDC distribution systems considering aggregated 
electric vehicles, J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy 11 (6) (2023) 1857–1867, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.35833/MPCE.2022.000576.
[21] H. Patil, V.N. Kalkhambkar, Grid integration of electric vehicles for economic 
benefits: A review, J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy 9 (1) (2021) 13–26, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.35833/MPCE.2019.000326.
[22] J.S. Giraldo, N.B. Arias, P.P. Vergara, M. Vlasiou, G. Hoogsteen, J.L. Hurink, 
Estimating risk-aware flexibility areas for electric vehicle charging pools via AC 
stochastic optimal power flow, J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy 11 (4) (2023) 
1247–1256, http://dx.doi.org/10.35833/MPCE.2022.000452.
[23] C. Diaz-Londono, G. Fambri, P. Maffezzoni, G. Gruosso, Enhanced EV charging 
algorithm considering data-driven workplace chargers categorization with multi-
ple vehicle types, eTransportation 20 (2024) 100326, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.etran.2024.100326.
[24] M. Tahmasebi, A. Ghadiri, M. Haghifam, S. Miri-Larimi, MPC-based approach 
for online coordination of EVs considering EV usage uncertainty, Int. J. Electr. 
Power Energy Syst. 130 (2021) 106931.
[25] Z. Ji, X. Huang, C. Xu, H. Sun, Accelerated model predictive control for electric 
vehicle integrated microgrid energy management: A hybrid robust and stochastic 
approach, Energies 9 (11) (2016) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en9110973.
[26] Y. Zhou, A. Ravey, M.-C. Péra, Real-time cost-minimization power-allocating 
strategy via model predictive control for fuel cell hybrid electric vehicles, Energy 
Convers. Manage. 229 (2021) 113721, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.
2020.113721.
[27] C. Minchala-Ávila, P. Arévalo, D. Ochoa-Correa, A systematic review of model 
predictive control for robust and efficient energy management in electric vehicle 
integration and V2G applications, Modelling 6 (1) (2025) http://dx.doi.org/10.
3390/modelling6010020.
[28] J.R.A. Klemets, E. Haugen, B.N. Torsæter, MPC-based control structure for high-
power charging stations capable of providing ancillary services, Int. J. Electr. 
Power Energy Syst. 159 (2024) 110039, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijepes.2024.
110039.
[29] E. Cording, J. Thakur, FleetRL: Realistic reinforcement learning environments 
for commercial vehicle fleets, SoftwareX 26 (2024) 101671, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.softx.2024.101671.
[30] G. Karatzinis, C. Korkas, M. Terzopoulos, C. Tsaknakis, A. Stefanopoulou, I. 
Michailidis, E. Kosmatopoulos, Chargym: An EV charging station model for 
controller benchmarking, in: Artificial Intelligence Applications and Innovations, 
Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 241–252.
[31] C. Yeh, V. Li, R. Datta, J. Arroyo, N. Christianson, C. Zhang, Y. Chen, 
M.M. Hosseini, A. Golmohammadi, Y. Shi, Y. Yue, A. Wierman, SustainGym: 
Reinforcement learning environments for sustainable energy systems, 2023.
[32] T. Morstyn, K.A. Collett, A. Vijay, M. Deakin, S. Wheeler, S.M. Bhagavathy, F. 
Fele, M.D. McCulloch, OPEN: An open-source platform for developing smart local 
energy system applications, Appl. Energy 275 (2020) 115397, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115397, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0306261920309090.
[33] C. Dalamagkas, V. Melissianos, G. Papadakis, A. Georgakis, V.-M. Nikiforidis, K. 
Hrissagis-Chrysagis, The open V2X management platform: An intelligent charging 
station management system, Inf. Syst. 129 (2025) 102494, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.is.2024.102494.
[34] T. Qian, M. Fang, Q. Hu, C. Shao, J. Zheng, V2sim: An open-source microscopic 
V2G simulation platform in urban power and transportation network, IEEE Trans. 
Smart Grid (2025) http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2025.3560976, 1–1.
[35] O. Frendo, N. Gaertner, H. Stuckenschmidt, Open source algorithm for smart 
charging of electric vehicle fleets, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 17 (9) (2021) 
6014–6022, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2020.3038144.
[36] Elaadnl open datasets for electric mobility research | update april 2020, 
2023, https://platform.elaad.io/analyses/ElaadNL_opendata.php. (Accessed 23 
November 2023).
[37] Pecan Street Data Portal. https://www.pecanstreet.org/dataport/.
[38] S. Pfenninger, I. Staffell, Long-term patterns of European PV output using 30 
years of validated hourly reanalysis and satellite data, Energy 114 (2016) 
1251–1265.
[39] A.A.E. Elsayed, S. Saxena, H.E.Z. Farag, Optimal design of a planning and 
contracting framework to enable vehicle to building and grid services via demand 
response, IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrification 11 (3) (2025) 7542–7556, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2025.3529346.
[40] C.F. Lee, K. Bjurek, V. Hagman, Y. Li, C. Zou, Vehicle-to-grid optimization 
considering battery aging, 22nd IFAC World Congr. 56 (2) (2023) 6624–6629.
[41] C. Diaz-Londono, P. Maffezzoni, L. Daniel, G. Gruosso, Comparison and analysis 
of algorithms for coordinated EV charging to reduce power grid impact, IEEE 
Open J. Veh. Technol. 5 (2024) 990–1003, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJVT.
2024.3435489.
[42] C. Diaz, F. Ruiz, D. Patino, Smart charge of an electric vehicles station: A model 
predictive control approach, in: 2018 IEEE Conference on Control Technology 
and Applications, CCTA, 2018, pp. 54–59, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CCTA.
2018.8511498.
[43] S. Orfanoudakis, C. Diaz-Londono, Y. Emre Yılmaz, P. Palensky, P.P. Vergara, 
EV2gym: A flexible V2G simulator for EV smart charging research and bench-
marking, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 26 (2) (2025) 2410–2421, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2024.3510945.
[44] ENTSO-E transparency platform. https://transparency.entsoe.eu/.
Electric Power Systems Research 250 (2026) 112082 
12 